MultiDB preview (#1082)
neo4j/docs-aura: modules/ROOT/pages/managing-instances/multiple-databases.adoc

= Multiple databases (Preview feature)
:description: This page describes multiple databases within an Aura instance and how to create and connect to a database.

label:AuraDB-Business-Critical[]
label:AuraDB-Virtual-Dedicated-Cloud[]

> == Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> == Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[IMPORTANT]
====
The multiple datatabase preview is governed by the link:https://neo4j.com/legal-terms/[Experimental Service Terms] in your customer agreement with Neo4j.
====
```

AuraDB Business Critical and AuraDB Virtual Dedicated Cloud support multiple databases within an AuraDB instance. 

> Create and manage databases using the Aura console or the Aura API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create and manage databases using the Aura console or the Aura API. 
```

> An instance has its own compute and storage, and the databases run within the instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each instance has its own compute and storage, and the databases run within the instance.
```

> 
> [IMPORTANT]
> ====
> The multiple datatabase preview is governed by the link:https://neo4j.com/legal-terms/[Experimental Service Terms] in your customer agreement with Neo4j.
> ====

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> == Benefits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Use multiple databases when you need clear separation of data within a single instance, without managing multiple instances.

* Lower administrative overhead compared to running multiple instances
* Development and test environments
* Different teams or features working in the same instance
* Faster to create and remove than separate instances

Example: You can create lightweight, isolated databases for individual tenants (such as customers or groups), scaling from a few to hundreds within one instance.

> == Use case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Instead of running separate instances for production, development, and training, and sample data, they can be combined into a single instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, instead of running separate instances for production, development, and training, and sample data, they can be combined into a single instance.
```

An 8GB instance could be allocated as:

* `Production` 4GB 
* `Development` 2GB 
* `Training` 1GB
* `Sample dataset` 1GB (for experimenting with queries, dashboards, and new features)

== Limits (RAM and maximum databases)

All databases share the instance’s compute and memory resources. 
By default a maximum number of 5 databases per GB of RAM can be provisioned.
The maximum number of databases depends on the memory size (RAM) of the instance and there is an upper limit of 100 across all configurations.

[cols="1,1", options="header"]
|===
| Available instance memory | Maximum databases

| 2GB
| 10

| 4GB
| 20

| 8GB
| 40

| 16GB
| 80

| 32GB and above
| 100
|===

== Multiple database in the Aura console

=== Enable multiple databases

[IMPORTANT]
====
You must enable multiple databases during instance creation. 
This setting cannot be changed later.
====

> To create an instance that can contain multiple databases, scroll down to *Additional settings* during instance creation and enable the *Multiple databases* toggle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On instance creation, scroll down to *Additional settings* during instance creation and enable *Multiple databases*.
```

[.shadow]
.Multiple databases toggle
image::multidb/multidb-toggle.png[]

=== Manage databases

> Create, view, and manage databases from the instance Databases view. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create, view, and manage databases from the instance Databases view. 
```

> Access it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can access it from:
```

* From the instance [...] more menu > select *Databases*.

> * Alternatively, open *Inspect* > select the *Databases* tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* From the instance [...] more menu > select *Databases*
* Open *Inspect* > select the *Databases* tab.
```
The second option, is that also from the [...] menu on the instance card?

* Faster to create and remove than separate instances

You can create lightweight isolated databases, scaling from a few to hundreds within one instance.

For example, instead of running separate instances for production, development, and training, and sample data, they can be combined into a single instance.

An 8GB instance could be allocated as:

* `Production` 4GB 
* `Development` 2GB 
* `Training` 1GB
* `Sample dataset` 1GB (for experimenting with queries, dashboards, and new features)

== Limits (RAM and maximum databases)

All databases share the instance’s compute and memory resources. 
By default a maximum number of 5 databases per GB of RAM can be provisioned.
The maximum number of databases depends on the memory size (RAM) of the instance and there is an upper limit of 100 across all configurations.

[cols="1,1", options="header"]
|===
| Available instance memory | Maximum databases

| 2GB
| 10

| 4GB
| 20

| 8GB
| 40

| 16GB
| 80

| 32GB and above
| 100
|===

== Multiple databases in the Aura console

=== Enable multiple databases

[IMPORTANT]
====
You must enable multiple databases during instance creation. 
This setting cannot be changed later.
====

> On instance creation, scroll down to *Additional settings* during instance creation and enable *Multiple databases*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On instance creation, scroll down to *Additional settings* and enable *Multiple databases*.
```

[.shadow]
.Multiple databases toggle
image::multidb/multidb-toggle.png[]

=== Manage databases

You can create, view, and manage databases from the instance Databases view. 
You can access it from:

> * From the instance [...] more menu > select *Databases*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The instance [...] more menu > select *Databases*
```

= Multiple databases (Preview feature)
:description: This page describes multiple databases within an Aura instance and how to create and connect to a database.

label:AuraDB-Business-Critical[]
label:AuraDB-Virtual-Dedicated-Cloud[]

[IMPORTANT]
====

> The multiple datatabase preview is governed by the link:https://neo4j.com/legal-terms/[Experimental Service Terms] in your customer agreement with Neo4j.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The multiple database preview is governed by the link:https://neo4j.com/legal-terms/[Experimental Service Terms] in your customer agreement with Neo4j.
```

Updates about supported preview features will be added to link:https://neo4j-aura.canny.io/changelog[Canny].
====

AuraDB Business Critical and AuraDB Virtual Dedicated Cloud support multiple databases within an AuraDB instance. 
You can create and manage databases using the Aura console or the Aura API. 
Each instance has its own compute and storage, and the databases run within the instance.

Use multiple databases when you need clear separation of data within a single instance, without managing multiple instances.

Benefits include:

* Lower administrative overhead compared to running multiple instances
* Faster to create and remove than separate instances

> * Lightweight isolated databases, scaling from a few to hundreds within one instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use multiple databases when you need clear separation of data within the same instance.
This allows for lower administrative overhead compared to running multiple instances.
It is faster to create and remove and allows for scaling within the same instance.
```

:description: This page describes multiple databases within an Aura instance and how to create and connect to a database.

label:AuraDB-Business-Critical[]
label:AuraDB-Virtual-Dedicated-Cloud[]

[IMPORTANT]
====
The multiple datatabase preview is governed by the link:https://neo4j.com/legal-terms/[Experimental Service Terms] in your customer agreement with Neo4j.
Updates about supported preview features will be added to link:https://neo4j-aura.canny.io/changelog[Canny].
====

AuraDB Business Critical and AuraDB Virtual Dedicated Cloud support multiple databases within an AuraDB instance. 
You can create and manage databases using the Aura console or the Aura API. 
Each instance has its own compute and storage, and the databases run within the instance.

Use multiple databases when you need clear separation of data within a single instance, without managing multiple instances.

Benefits include:

* Lower administrative overhead compared to running multiple instances
* Faster to create and remove than separate instances
* Lightweight isolated databases, scaling from a few to hundreds within one instance

Use cases include: 

* Development and test environments in one instance

> * Different teams or features working in the same instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows you to keep multiple environments in one instance.
```
Let's avoid too many bullet lists. The following sentence says the same as the first bullet point anyway.

For example, instead of running separate instances for production, development, training and sample data, they can all be combined into a single instance.

An 8GB instance could be allocated as:

* `Production` 4GB 
* `Development` 2GB 
* `Training` 1GB
* `Sample dataset` 1GB (for experimenting with queries, dashboards and new features)

== Limits (RAM and maximum databases)

All databases share the instance’s compute and memory resources. 
By default a maximum number of 5 databases per GB of RAM can be provisioned.
The maximum number of databases depends on the memory size (RAM) of the instance and there is an upper limit of 100 across all configurations.

[cols="1,1", options="header"]
|===
| Available instance memory | Maximum databases

| 2GB
| 10

| 4GB
| 20

| 8GB
| 40

| 16GB
| 80

| 32GB and above
| 100
|===

> == Managing databases

Reviewer: This is odd, the first header is how to create the *instance* which logically sit a level *above* database management.

Reviewer: This still applies

=== API requirements

[NOTE] 
====
All endpoints below now require your Organization ID and Project ID in the path, in addition to your Instance ID.
====

Standard guidance for creating API credentials applies, see xref:api/overview.adoc[Aura API -> Overview].

MultiDB uses the beta version of the Aura API. 
Use link:https://neo4j.com/docs/aura/platform/api/specification/?urls.primaryName=Aura%20v2beta1[https://api.neo4j.io/v2beta1] as the base URL.

=== Create a multi-database instance

[IMPORTANT]
====
You must enable multiple databases during instance creation. 
This setting cannot be changed later.
====

[.tabbed-example]
====
[.include-with-Aura-console]
=====

> To create a multi-database instance, during instance creation scroll down to *Additional settings* during instance creation and enable *Multiple databases*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During instance creation, scroll down to *Additional settings* during instance creation and enable *Multiple databases*.
```

[.shadow]
image::multidb/multidb-toggle.png[Multiple databases toggle]

=====
[.include-with-API]
=====

To create a multi-database instance via API:

[source]
----
POST /organizations/{orgId}/projects/{projectId}/instances

curl -X POST "https://api.neo4j.io/v2beta1/organizations/$ORG_ID/projects/$PROJECT_ID/instances" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "region": "europe-west1",
    "memory": "4GB",
    "storage": "8GB",
    "name": "mymultidbtestinstance",
    "type": "business-critical",
    "cloud_provider": "gcp",
    "multi_database": true
  }'
----
=====
====

=== Create additional databases

[NOTE]
====
Databases cannot be created using Cypher database management commands, only via API and Aura console.
====

[.tabbed-example]
====
[.include-with-Aura-console]
=====

> To create additional databases, from the instance [...] more menu > select *Databases* > select *Create Database*. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the instance [...] more menu > select *Databases* > select *Create Database*. 
```

A database name is generated automatically (for example, `293fd870`). 

[.shadow]
image::multidb/multidb-create.png[Create database]

=====
[.include-with-API]
=====

> To create additional databases via API:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
The header already says this

[source]
----
POST /organizations/{orgId}/projects/{projectId}/instances/{instanceId}/databases

curl -X POST "https://api.neo4j.io/v2beta1/organizations/$ORG_ID/projects/$PROJECT_ID/instances/$INSTANCE_ID/databases" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
----
=====
====

=== View database details

[.tabbed-example]
====
[.include-with-Aura-console]
=====

> You can create, view, and manage databases from the instance Databases view. 

Reviewer: The header only says *View database details* so I find it awkward that both create and manage are included. Is the same information returned from the API?

Reviewer: This is still awkwardly titled since the console instructions include create and manage, and the API instructions include instance details.

You can access it from:

* From the instance [...] more menu > select *Databases*
* Open *Inspect* > select the *Databases* tab.

=====
[.include-with-API]
=====

Instance details

[source]
----
GET /organizations/{orgId}/projects/{projectId}/instances/{instanceId}/databases
----

Database details

[source]
----
GET /organizations/{orgId}/projects/{projectId}/instances/{instanceId}/databases/{databaseId}
----
=====
====

=== Delete database

[.tabbed-example]
====
[.include-with-Aura-console]
=====

> To delete a database, open the database details > from the database […] more menu > select *Delete*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the database details > from the database […] more menu > select *Delete*.
```
As above, the header already says that it's about deleting.

| 2GB
| 10

| 4GB
| 20

| 8GB
| 40

| 16GB
| 80

| 32GB and above
| 100
|===

== Multiple database in the Aura console

=== Enable multiple databases

[IMPORTANT]
====
You must enable multiple databases during instance creation. 
This setting cannot be changed later.
====

To create an instance that can contain multiple databases, scroll down to *Additional settings* during instance creation and enable the *Multiple databases* toggle.

[.shadow]
.Multiple databases toggle
image::multidb/multidb-toggle.png[]

=== Manage databases

Create, view, and manage databases from the instance Databases view. 
Access it:

* From the instance [...] more menu > select *Databases*.
* Alternatively, open *Inspect* > select the *Databases* tab.

=== Create a database

To create additional databases, from the instance [...] more menu > select *Databases* > select *Create Database*. 

A database name is generated automatically (for example, `293fd870`). 

[NOTE]
====
Databases cannot be created using Cypher database management commands, only via API and Aura console.
====

[.shadow]
.Create database
image::multidb/multidb-create.png[]

== Manage multi-database instances via Aura API

> Standard guidance for Creating API credentials applies as per docs: https://neo4j.com/docs/aura/api/overview/ 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Standard guidance for Creating API credentials applies, see link:{neo4j.docs-base-uri}/aura/api/overview/[Aura API].
```

----

== Connecting with Drivers

[.tabbed-example]
====
[.include-with-Python-example]
=====

[source, python]
----
from neo4j import GraphDatabase

uri = "neo4j+s://instanceid.databases.neo4j.io"
username = "neo4j"
password = "xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx"
database = "my_database_id"

driver = GraphDatabase.driver(uri, auth=(username, password))
with driver.session(database=database) as session:
    result = session.run("MATCH (n) RETURN count(n) AS node_count")
    print(result.single())
----
=====
[.include-with-javascript-example]
=====

[source, javascript]
----
const neo4j = require('neo4j-driver');

const uri = "neo4j+s://instanceid.databases.neo4j.io";
const user = "neo4j";
const password = "xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx";
const database = "my_database_id";

const driver = neo4j.driver(uri, neo4j.auth.basic(user, password));

async function main() {
  const session = driver.session({ database });
  const result = await session.run("MATCH (n) RETURN count(n) AS node_count");
  console.log(result.records[0].get("node_count").toInt());
  await session.close();
  await driver.close();
}

main();
----
=====
====

> == Connecting external sources

Reviewer: This seems a bit awkwardly placed now that you've added examples for both API and drivers?

When connecting to a multi-database instance from an external client, specify the `database name` as part of the connection. 
The database name identifies which database to access. 
If no database name is provided, the connection cannot be established.
This applies to drivers, the Query API, and other external sources.

== Features

=== Supported features

> Multiple databases are supported across Aura tools. For working with multiple databases, see the following documentation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple databases are supported across Aura tools. 
There are some things to consider when working with multiple databases:
```

* xref:managing-instances/backup-restore-export.adoc#_multi_database_instances[Backup, export, and restore]: Take backups of individual databases.
* Bloom and Query: When connecting, select the target database using the connection bar.
* Metrics: Switch between databases using the Database dropdown in Metrics.
* Import: Select the instance and the target database when running an import.
* link:https://neo4j.com/docs/aura/platform/api/specification/?urls.primaryName=Aura%20v2beta1[Aura API]
* Security & Networking: Instance level SSO, IP Filtering & Private Endpoints (where available for Tier)

> === Features coming in future releases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Coming features

While multiple databases are in preview, not all features of Aura are supported yet.
Future releases will include support for:
```

* Pause and resume for instances or individual databases
* Custom database naming or renaming
* Default database management
* Instance level backup & restore
* Activity Feed 

=== Unsupported preview features

Some features are not yet in scope for multi-database instances:

* Instance clone, CDC, Secondaries, Tool authentication (aka Seamless login), Custom Endpoints.

> * We're prioritizing based on customer feedback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some features are not yet in scope for multi-database instances, such as instance clone, CDC, Secondaries, Tool authentication (aka Seamless login), and Custom Endpoints.
```
